In this video we'll learn about the C++ copy constructor when objects are copied.
C++ must be able to create a new object from an existing object in order to do this.
It uses something called a copy constructor.
There are several use cases where a copy constructor is used.
For example if we pass an object by value to a function or method as a parameter then we need to make
a copy of that object.
The same is true when we return an object by value from a function or method and the last common use
case is when you want to construct a new object based on an existing object of the same class.
C++ must provide a way to accomplish this copying.
So C++ uses a copy constructor.
We can provide our own copy constructor and we can define exactly the semantics we need for object copying.
But if we don't provide a copy constructor the C++ compiler will provide a compiler generated one.
Let's look at some of the use cases in more detail so you can see exactly where an object copy is required.
The first use case is when we pass an object to a function or method by value.
Remember the default mode of passing data in C++ is by value which means a copy is made.
So in this example we have here which is a player object and then we have a display player function
that expects a player object by value.
So when we call this function and pass in Hero the function parameter p will be created and it will
be created as a copy of hero using the copy constructor.
Notice that P is local to the display player function.
So when P goes out of scope the destructor will be called as well.
In this use case we have an enemy object which is a player.
We also have a function create super enemy that creates and returns a player object.
Notice that the player object an enemy is created in the function and then return from this function.
Since we're returning an enemy by value a copy of the an enemy object is made by the copy constructor.
The last use case will look at is we want to explicitly create a new object from an existing object.
In this example we have a hero object and we want to create another object called another hero based
on hero.
In this case a copy is made using the copy constructor.
So now you can see where copy constructors are used.
Now let's see what they do.
If you don't provide a copy constructor C++ will generate a default copy constructor that will do member
wise copy.
That means that it will go through the class attributes and copy them from the source object to the
target object for attributes that are objects then their copy constructor will be called.
In many cases this is perfectly fine and the default copy constructor is all you need.
But if you're using raw pointers that only the pointer will be copied not the data that it's pointing
to.
This is referred to as a shallow copy rather than a deep copy.
I'll defer shallow versus deep copying until the next video Well we'll look at a specific example.
So best practice with copy constructors are always provided a user defined copy constructor.
If you use using raw pointers always implement the copy constructor or the Konst reference parameter.
Use the standard template library classes as membra attributes.
They already provide copy constructors or you can avoid using raw pointers as data members if possible
or use smart pointers.
So what does the method signature look like for a copy constructor.
The syntax might look strange at first but it's pretty straightforward.
First it's a constructor so it has the same name as the class and in the parameter list we have a single
object passed in of the same type.
We pass that object in as a reference and a constant y by reference and constant first.
If we pass it by value then we have to make a copy of it.
That's the whole point of the copy constructor.
We would defeat the purpose and end up with never ending recursive calls and as a constant because the
semantics of copying means that we're copying the source we're not modifying it.
So the Konst prevents any modification to the source object.
The last two statements are the prototypes for the player and the Count copy constructors.
Note that are exactly the same except for the names of the classes.
So how do we actually implement the copy constructor in the next video.
We'll look at the case where we have raw pointers as data members and we'll do a deep copy.
And this video will just concentrate on shallow copies.
In the body of the copy constructor we do whatever we need to initialize a new object.
Remember we have access to source so we can reference any attributes we want from source but rather
than write assignment statements in the constructor body we can use a constructor initialization list
as we've done before.
Here is the implemented player class copy constructor.
Notice that we're initializing the newly created object attributes in the initializer list based on
the source object's attributes.
Pretty simple and intuitive of course any code we write in the constructor body will be executed immediately
after the new object is initialized.
And here you can see the copy constructor for the account class.
Again we're initializing the newly created object based on the existing source account object.
Now let's head over to the idea we'll write a copy constructor for the player class and step through
the code so you can see exactly what it's called.
Ok so I mean the idea now and I'm in the section 13 workspace in the copy constructor project.
And what we've got here is that player class that we've been using all along.
I just made a couple of little changes to it.
I created three getters here and we're going to use those getters in a display function which will write
in a little bit and then just return the name to health and DXP.
We've got our single three our constructor here with default parameters as we've done before and it's
implemented right down here using our initializer.
OK so that's all we've got we've created four objects down here.
Now the first thing we want to do is.
That's right.
The prototype for the copy constructor
and it looks like the name of the class which is player in this case.
And a single object in the parameter list and it's a constant player by reference.
And we could just leave that or we can put source in here.
Doesn't really matter.
So that's it.
That's all we need to say.
Obviously we need to implement that we'll do it in a minute and the other thing I want to do here is
I want to write a destructor and basically I just want to know when this thing is going to be destroyed
because it's going to be very important so that we understand the lifecycle of these objects so again
how do we write a destructor if we put a Tildy in front of the destructor name which is the name of
the class.
No parameters and in this case I'm just simply saying I want to output that the destructor is being
called for.
It would just put a colon here and would do that for that name.
That what we know which object is actually being destroyed.
OK that's it.
So now we've got our destructor.
So what we need to do now is implement that copy constructor and I'm going to do it right down here
right after our constructor.
So what do we do.
Well we start off by writing.
Player.
Scope resolution operator.
Player again.
And we're going to implement the same prototype basically right.
So it's Konst player by reference source.
And now what we can do is we can create the initializer list if we like it.
How are we going to initialize this.
Well I want to initialize the name attribute to what.
To this object's name attribute.
In which case it would be source
daat name.
I want to initialize the health attribute to source non-health number I'm making a copy so I'm copying
these values over and the XP to source dot XP.
That's it.
Now we implement an empty body for that copy constructor and what we'll do is in the body will write
an output statement will say see out and we'll write something like copy constructor and we'll do something
like made that C we made a copy of what we made a copy of.
Source name
will put an end line there.
OK so that's it.
That just tells us that it'll will tell us what we've made a copy of that will come in handy when we're
stepping through this and we can understand what's going on.
OK so now we've got our copy constructor set up.
Now let's get this create a function that expects a player by value and we know that that's one of the
use cases where the copy constructor is called So let's do that.
Let's write just a regular function and we'll call it display player
and it will expect a player object or call it P.
And remember it's expecting it by value here.
That's the default way of passing parameters around.
So this implies a copy in in here all we're gonna do and I'll just copy the code that I've got over
here and so I don't have to type it all in.
And what we'll do here is just create those three out put statements that displays P-doc get name P-doc
get help.
So which just going to display those values for P.
Ok now I'm going to put some breakpoints all over here so we can see what's being called.
We won't do it in the destructor.
We'll see that being called it'll just print out destructor called.
And what we've got now is we've got an empty object Frank hero and villain which are all objects and
these are just regular constructor calls happening here.
So what we'll do down here is actually we'll do it right here.
What we'll do now is we'll say something like display player leave an extra line here will say display
player and we'll pass it in empty empty is an object.
So what's going to happen is a copy of that object will be made.
OK so what I'm going to do is again put a break a breakpoint right there and let's debug this and we'll
step through it.
And I'll move the output window just over there.
OK so let's step through this and you can see that right now we're online 26 and that's because that's
empty player object is being created here.
And we should see that print out that constructor right there.
So we've just three args constructor for none.
Remember that's the default none zero zero.
And we'll step through again and now we're just about to call this display player function here.
We'll look at empty which is the object we just created and it contains none for name zero and for health
and zero for XP.
OK so we're just about to call this function right here.
Now before we pass any information in we have to make a copy of it right because we're doing pass by
value or pass by copy.
So I've got empty which you can see right here.
I need to make a copy of empty and that's what is going to be.
Now P is local to this function.
So again it's a copy of empty and it's on the stack right.
So let's step through them what we should see is we should see the copy constructor being called because
a copy needs to be made right now.
So let's step through.
And there you go you can see we're right on line 31 and we're in the copy constructor what are we doing
now.
We're making a copy of empty and that copy is going to be called Pete.
So let's step through again.
We just did the initialization and now it's going to say copy constructor made copy of none.
That's exactly what we did.
We made a copy of that object whose name is none.
OK now I'll step through one more time.
Now that P has been created you can see right here it's a local variable to this function and it's none
0 0.
It's a copy of empty.
There are two different objects but they have the same values right now.
OK let's walk through this.
We just displayed the name the health and the expe.
Now what should happen is P is going out of scope right now right.
We're going to leave this function.
So that stack frame needs to be cleaned up.
So the destructor for p should be called the destructor for the copy not the destructor for empty but
the destructor for that P copy.
So let's do that.
And there you go you can see the destructor has been called and now we're back in Main on line 46 and
from this point on we're just constructing objects as usual.
OK.
So hopefully that's clear you can see it's these little nuances in that using the debugger to step through
things really really makes things very nice to follow.
So let's do another example here.
I'm going to stop the debugger here and what I'll do is we'll create that empty when you know what let's
create a different Let's create a different empty.
In this case let's just create something called x x x x with one hundred and fifty.
That way we know what those values are.
And what I want to do here is I want to get rid of that break point right here.
I want to create another player object.
OK.
And I'm going to call it my new object
and I'm going to create a copy of that empty object.
So again let's see what's going on here.
I've got empty is a player object and I'm setting the name to a bunch of X's to health 200 DXP to 50
then I'm creating another object is called My new object and I'm creating it from empty.
So I want a copy of empty this will call the copy constructor.
That's the whole idea making a copy.
OK so let me put a breakpoint there and it's run this debugger through again.
OK so now we're here constructing that empty object right over here.
So let's walk through that until we get to that other break point on line 44 and that's where we're
at now.
So at this point empty has been created.
If I look at empty up here you can see I've got a bunch of X's 150.
So now I'm right here on line 44.
This is a constructor right.
I'm constructing or initialiser instantiating the jargons all the same a my new object which is a player
in this case from this object that I've already created.
That's where the copy comes in.
So when I step through this I expect the copy constructor to be called again.
So let's do that.
And there we are we're right in the copy constructor in the initialiser and I'm going to walk through
that.
It says right here I made a copy of that original x x x x x object.
I'll step through again.
And now we're right back to where we started before.
OK.
So hopefully that gives you some insight into these copy constructors and how they work they really
make a lot of sense.
The syntax is a little wonky sometimes but it's pretty straightforward.
Now one thing that I should mention is right here.
We're using the initializer list to initialize that new object.
We could change this if we like and just do something like
use a delegating constructor here.
Right.
So we could delegate source don't name source DOD health
and source DOD Expwy
and I need a little colon in front of that just like before.
So what we're doing there is we're doing the delegation and the same exact thing should happen.
We run the debugger here and we'll walk through that real quick so you can see the delegation now happening
before we weren't delegating because we were just initialising right in place there.
Right.
So at this point let's walk through it until we get to 9:45 this time which is where we're at right
now.
So now I'm going to call the copy constructor again to make a copy of this empty opted we just created.
So let's step through it right here.
I mean the copy constructor.
But now rather than use this initializer I'm going to delegate the construction of this object to my
constructor and which is this guy right up here.
So in this case when I walk through it you see transferral control will transfer up to here on line
25 and that's exactly where we are now.
Now we're in the regular 3R constructor and it's going to say three args constructor member the first
one was for empty.
This is for the copy of empty.
So we've got the two objects alive now.
And when I'm done I'm going to come back and I said made a copy of it.
OK so there you go.
There's the copy constructor.
You can see how we can get from that as well.